the following content is provided under
a Creative Commons license your support
will help MIT OpenCourseWare continue to
offer high quality educational resources
for free
to make a donation or to view additional
materials from hundreds of MIT courses
visit MIT opencourseware at ocw.mit.edu
so this is on oxidation-reduction go
okay so the demo involves a strip of
magnesium and the magnesium is a pretty
reactive metal right now it's coated
with magnesium oxide and what I'm gonna
do is I'm gonna light it on fire when it
gets lit it's gonna glow very very
brightly and it's gonna react with this
block of carbon dioxide and magnesium
oxide is what you have up there both of
those magnesium oxide molecules will
react with one molecule of carbon
dioxide to form just graphene carbon as
well as magnesium dioxide so you're
gonna get like a white and black powder
inside of here and it's gonna be really
bright and really dangerous and can we
lower the lights is that something we
can do is that makes it a whole lot more
fun
[Music]
don't try it one more time okay
all right okay good try
so oxidation reductions are really fun
and so we're going to continue and tell
you about those on Friday so oxidation
reduction or redox so redox is the
shorthand for oxidation reduction let's
bring out your hands but let's bring the
noise level down people is still been
complaining about the noise and class
all right so a redox reaction
chemical reaction that involves an
exchange of electrons and so we saw what
happens when we mix this with with some
dry ice alright so let's do some
definitions we always start units with
definitions and most of you know some of
these definitions already oxidation
electron loss reduction electrons are
gained this one you may or may not be
familiar with oxidizing agent it accepts
electrons so it oxidizes other things
but it itself is reduced and reducing
agent donates electrons it reduces other
things it itself is oxidized and before
you turn the page I just want to try to
get you to remember these two terms so
one way that I like to think about it is
that a reducing agent might be somebody
who is a little bit shady they might
walk up to someone and say in a crowd
space don't look at me
just listen do you want to buy an
electron so that would be an agent of
reduction going around now there could
be ones that are a little bit shady
selling electrons to the highest bidder
but there could also be engines of good
I told you about free radical species
there's a lot of free radicals in the
universe they can be dangerous because
they have a single unpaired electron
which makes them really highly reactive
so there might be an agent a secret
agent of oxidation and it might want to
shield the universe from the power of
free rabbit
and so we would go along and it would
oxidize that give it give it take that
that electron away and oxidize it and
become reduced itself take that free
radical away because the free radical
species might not know how dangerous it
is it's for everybody's good to shield
you from that power you might also have
an ancient of reduction that's a secret
agent that might go up to the free
radical species and give it an extra
electron and then it has to and then
it's more stable and less reactive so
you might have these ancients so that's
how you should think about it think
about an agent of oxidation it wants to
go out and oxidize for the good of
mankind or an agent of reduction that
wants to go out and reduce other things
so that might help you remember those
those definitions well we'll hope so all
right so let's take a look now we always
start every unit with definitions and
then we have a set of rules and
guidelines so let's take a look at the
guidelines luckily these guidelines are
really pretty straightforward and you
really shouldn't have a lot of
difficulty keeping them in mind some of
them we've really seen already we just
didn't realize that they were going to
be the guidelines that we would have so
guidelines for assigning oxidation
numbers in a free met element every atom
has an oxidation number of zero okay
that seems pretty straightforward h2
oxidation number zero rule two ions
composed of only one atom also called
monatomic ions have an oxidation number
that's equal to their charge
if this wasn't true it would be deeply
disturbing lithium plus one ions has an
oxidation number of plus one I think
we're good okay also in number two in
forming compounds Group one metals have
an oxidation number of plus one lithium
and all of its friends sodium etc group
two metals have an oxidation number of
plus two calcium for example and
aluminum is plus three in its compounds
this is also something that we've seen
both
for those group 1 and group 2 metals are
not all that exciting they pretty much
want to get their noble gas
configuration and they wanted lose
either one if you're in Group one or two
electrons if you're in group two and so
that's what they do here so this is good
to keep in mind because it's going to
help you with a figure out the oxidation
number of other elements for which there
are not such hard and fast rules number
three oxygen oxygen in most compounds is
minus two again not that surprising that
it would want to gain those two
electrons however there's some
exceptions oxygen is just an element
full of exceptions if it is in peroxides
hydrogen peroxide o - 2 - then it's
going to have an oxidation number of
minus 1 so peroxides and later we'll see
super oxides are exceptions but if it's
not a peroxide or a superoxide it's
gonna be minus 2 all right
rule number 4 hydrogen hydrogen is all
mostly plus 1 we probably could guess
that but there actually are some
exceptions for this and you're gonna see
a lot of those exceptions in this unit
and pretty much after this unit not so
much ever again the exceptions are for
the group 1 and the group 2 so the group
1 and group 2 rules supersede the fact
that hydrogen is usually plus 1 so if
you have hydrogen with lithium lithium
is going to be plus 1 so hydrogen will
be minus 1 sodium is is the same here
and calcium that's group 2 again
hydrogen would be minus 1 so Group one
group two rules supersede hydrogen
alright what about our halides we have
fluorine it wants to be minus 1 other
halogens chloride bromide iodide are
negative when they're in salt such as
sodium chloride but if oxygen is there
the oxygen rules are the ones that
follow so here
if you have CL with ox
then you're going to have a positive
oxidation number for the chlorine
because oxygen is going to be minus two
all right and you'll see a number of
these so-called oxyacids in this unit
all right six this one you probably
already know but in a neutral model
molecule the sums of the oxidation
numbers must equal zero so the sums must
be neutral if the molecule is neutral
and if you have something that is a
polyatomic multi atom ion the sum of the
individual oxidation numbers needs to be
equal to the overall charge on that ion
so again we've seen things like this
before so we should have no trouble with
these words okay so let's just look an
example of this suppose we have our
friend NH four plus
what is hydrogen's oxidation number
going to be in this molecule it'll be
plus one so it's not with a Group one or
group two elements so it's gonna be plus
one what about nitrogen there are no
rules about nitrogen so we have to
figure out based on the other rules what
the oxidation number of nitrogen will be
what is it going to be here because of
the rule we just talked about that the
sum needs of the oxidation numbers needs
to be equal to the charge on the
molecule the charge is plus one so we
have four hydrogen's four plus plus one
minus three is going to equal plus one
so nitrogen had to be minus three
nitrogen can have a lot of different
numbers so you want to pay attention to
what's around it and whether the rules
or guidelines about those other elements
all right seven oxidation numbers don't
have to be integers they almost always
are but there is one notable exception
and it's from oxygen perhaps not a
surprise oxygen is always causing
trouble
so in superoxide you have
Oh 2-1 so what is the oxidation number
on each oxygen in that Oh 2-1 molecule
yep so it's minus 1/2 so oxygen is
usually minus 2 except in peroxides and
superoxides all right so let's take a
look at some examples and I'll write
some of these on the board and here are
all of your rules so you can yell out
what you think I should be doing with
these as we go along
okay so we have lithium 2 oxide so here
we know a lot about this
what's the oxygen going to be minus 2
the overall charge on the molecule is
zero and we have two lithium's and
what's the charge on each one plus one
and so plus two minus two is zero
great let's do another one well do pcl5
next so what do we know about CL what
charge do we expect here minus one and
there are five of those so chlorine
likes to be minus one exception is with
oxygen but it's not with oxygen here the
overall charge is going to be zero
because it's a neutral molecule so what
does that mean about the charge on our
phosphorus right okay so now let's try
hno3 so let's do oxygen first what
charge we expect on oxygen
- - so we have three of those - -
overall this is going to be zero
nitrogen can be varied so let's do
hydrogen what do we expect identity - so
what does that leave for nitrogen close
by so we have plus 6 then minus 6 is
zero all right so why don't you try the
next one as a clicker question
all right ten more seconds
mm-hmm yep so oxygen is - - it's not in
a peroxide or a superoxide the overall
charge is zero so that means that each
nitrogen must be plus one so we have
plus two minus two is zero
yep the hydrogen peroxide example so
it'll it'll say that it's a peroxide so
or a superoxide yeah so don't don't
worry you don't have to worry about that
it's gonna be clear okay good so now
let's talk about some reactions that
involve oxidations and reductions and to
talk about these reactions you need to
know how to do this and then we're going
to talk about balancing reactions and
you need all of these skills alright so
first I just want to tell you about
something called the disproportion a
ssin reaction where you have one element
that is going to be both oxidized and
reduced and this is a good example to
allow us to think about what's happening
in a different reaction so in this
reaction the element that is going to be
both oxidized and reduced is CL now um
sodium is going to be a spectator ion
and the oxygen is going to stay in its -
to form here and so we have chlorine
going to chlorine in this compound and
in this compound so we can break this
down and think about what's happening
with this species going to this and then
also going to CL - so let's think about
what the oxidation number of chlorine is
in CL o - so first oxygen I read told
you is going to be -2 the overall charge
on the molecule is minus 1 so chlorine
has to make this equation work so what
is the oxidation number of Cl
so yeah plus one here now let's take a
look at this so oxygen we're gonna have
as minus two there are three of them
that's going to equal over all minus one
so what's the oxidation number of
chlorine here right so we have a case
now where we're going from plus 1 to
plus 5 is that an oxidation or a
reduction that's an oxidation so we're
increasing the number it is losing
electrons it's becoming oxidized so down
here we already have done all of our
work and know that this is also going to
be plus 1 so in this case we're going
from plus 1 to minus 1 is that an
oxidation or a reduction very good
disproportionation reaction otherwise
something has to be oxidized same thing
has to be oxidized and reduced so this
is how you think about about this type
of reaction so to consider whether
something's being oxidized or reduced
you need to be able to dissect out what
the oxidation numbers are all right
now we're going to balance so balancing
is going to become very important for
doing problems later on balancing redox
reactions you balance differently if
you're in acidic conditions versus basic
conditions so we're first we're going to
do acidic conditions and we're going to
run through the steps for doing this
first step is we're going to write two
half reactions for this so we have iron
in here and we have chromium in here and
we're going to separate those out so
we're going to think about what iron is
doing separately from what the chromium
is doing so first let's write out our
chromium and think about what is
happening to it here and that is a
clicker question
all right ten more seconds
okay so let's take a look at why 2 is
correct for one thing you just have to
remember the definitions for another you
have to recognize what's happening to
the chromium so let's take a look at the
chromium now so we have oxygen at minus
2 there are seven of them and the
overall charge of the molecule is minus
2 and so what does that mean for the
oxidation number of this chromium is
we're gonna have 12 minus 14 equals -2
so we're going from plus 6 over here to
plus 3 here so is that an oxidation or
reduction so that's the reduction so I
kind of liked this unit coming after
acids and bases because a lot of those
problems I think make people's brains
hurt a little bit and you get here and
it's like basic math so it's kind of
exciting
alright so the iron is even simpler
we're going from plus 2 to plus 3 so
that's an oxidation so one thing is
being reduced the other thing is being
oxidized that's what makes it a redox
reaction all right so we know what's
happening in terms of what's being
oxidized what's being reduced now we and
we broken these into two half reactions
now we need to balance alright so the
first thing we're going to do is we're
going to balance our elements that are
not oxygen and hydrogen so we're gonna
balance chromium and we're gonna balance
our iron what do we need to add to this
top to balance chromium we need to add a
2 and we don't need to do anything to
our iron we have 1 iron on one side 1
iron on the other side alright so all
you need to do is insert the 2 next step
we're gonna add water to balance oxygen
so how much water do we need to add to
the top reaction to balance the oxygen
so so here we're gonna add seven waters
to balance the oxygen and again we have
nothing to do down there
alright so let's keep going next we want
to balance the hydrogen we just added
those waters and so now we have to
balance hydrogen so we're gonna balance
the hydrogen by adding h plus some books
have you balanced the hydrogen by adding
a more correct species which is
hydronium ion but when you do that you
screw up your oxygens that you just
balanced so that is infinitely harder to
balance equations that way so I say
let's not do that so let's just use H+
so how many H pluses do we need to add
over here to balance the hydrogen 14
we've added 14 and again expression next
we are going to balance the charge by
inserting electrons so over here we have
14 minus 2 plus 12 and over here we have
plus 6 so how many electrons are gonna
are we going to need to add then add 6
so we've added 6 over here so they have
a negative charge so now we should be
balanced on both sides and now we
finally get to do something with a
bottom expression and we can add an
electron over here to balance the charge
so plus 2 here plus 2 net on the other
side all right now we want to multiply
so that the electrons are going to
cancel because this is an overall
oxidation reduction reaction our
electrons should cancel so why do we
need to multiply the bottom equation by
6 and there we go 6 here 6 here and 6
here now this is one of the play
is that people often in exams make a
mistake where they write six and then
put parentheses around it indicating
that you're multiplying the whole thing
by six which is fine but then they
forget to actually carry that out on the
next step so when you multiply make sure
that you continue to if sometimes it's
better just to write it all out because
otherwise it's really easy to forget and
not multiply and then things won't make
sense at the end all right so now we can
add the half reactions and make the
appropriate cancellations so we've now
added it all together six electrons 14
H+ we have our chromium oxide compound
we have now our six iron plus twos our
two chromium plus threes our seven
waters our six iron plus 3s and our six
electrons and if we did everything right
then the electrons should cancel and we
can double check it's always a good idea
to double-check that it's balanced so we
have fourteen H's here fourteen H's
there chromium two two oxygens seven
seven iron six six this can catch a
mistake that you might have made and
then check the charge plus 14 minus two
plus twelve on one side plus six plus 18
so 24 on both sides it's pretty good
right that's pretty simple so balancing
that's an acidic solution we know it's
an exciting because we have 14 H+ that
feels quite acidic what do you do for
basic solution now so for a basic
solution what I recommend is just do the
exact same thing that you did for your
acidic solution and here again was the
answer that we have and then quote
neutralize the acid and make it basic
adjust your pH by adding Oh H minus our
hydroxide ion concentration to each side
so if we do that now we're going to add
1400 H minus to this side and 1400
h- to that side now 14 Oh H - plus 14 h
+ are going to give us 14 water
molecules over here and on this side we
still have 1408 now we have this is not
simplified because we have 14 waters on
one side and seven on the other side so
we can take that cancel out set these
seven and we have seven left over here
so we have seven waters now on one side
and fourteen hydroxides on the other so
if we look at both of these expressions
in acidic solution and in basic solution
here in acidic solution we have 14 h+ on
one side and seven waters on the other
in basic we have seven waters on this
side and 14 Oh H - on this side
everything else should be the same and
they should all add up alright so there
we go that is balancing
oxidation-reduction x' it seems really
straightforward but it's very important
we'll see next week that we need to use
this information to be able to do
problems
all right so end of 14 now -
electrochemistry so today's handout so
we're talking about oxidation reduction
we're continuing talking about oxidation
reduction I just want to remind you how
really important oxidation reduction
reactions are so we've talked about
photosynthesis in this class we've
talked about fuel cells all of these
reactions that make energy involve
oxidation reduction loss of electrons
gain of electrons basically the human
body is a big battery we have lots of
oxidation reduction reactions going on
inside of us this is how we live this is
how we make energy this is how we
survive
alright so electrochemistry is the study
of redox reactions usually thinking
about how they occur at an electrode so
there are two types of reactions that
you will be considering you might be
considering a reaction that generates an
electric current electron flow or
electricity from
a spontaneous reaction and you might
consider one where you need to drive a
reaction that is non spontaneous using
an electric current so a spontaneous
reaction Delta G is what positive or
negative so spontaneous reaction Delta G
is negative it's less than zero a non
spontaneous reaction is positive just a
little review there for exam three all
right so electrochemistry study of these
redox reactions electrochemical cells
are devices where you generate electrons
and they flow through the cell and so
you have the flow of electrons through a
circuit and again that can be generated
by a spontaneous reaction and if it is
generated by a spontaneous reaction
that's called a galvanic cell or you can
use an electric current to force a non
spontaneous reaction to go and that's
called
an electrolytic cell and it's important
to remember those definitions because a
lot of problems tell you Oh in this
electrolytic cell and without that's
telling you key information about what's
going on in that problem so if you don't
have these committed to memories you
will find yourself in trouble but it's
not too bad it's just two terms alright
so a battery then so I have a a battery
here a battery is a collection of
galvanic cells and it's going to give us
it's going to use spontaneous reactions
to give us an electric current all right
and again electrodes the definition for
those they're just the conductor's
through which the electrons travel and
there are two types let's quiet down
again hear the noise two types of
electrodes we have anodes and cathodes
all right so let's look an
electrochemical cell
and consider again the anodes and the
cathodes so this is my beautiful
depiction of an electrochemical cell
this might be a better to pick
of what it looks like but I think mine
is not bad just to help you out that's
supposed to be a beaker that has fluid
in it this is also a beaker that has
fluid in it and this is my electrode
that is an anode in this case there is
the anode there the electrode there
here's another one that's the cathode
another type of electrode it's over here
this is my salt bridge the salt bridge
here is this plastic tube and here I
have a wire connecting my electrodes
here you can't really see the wire but
in both cases it goes through some kind
of voltmeter that measures the electric
electric current all right so now we'll
get rid of this better picture but you
can think about this picture is that
picture if that helps and I always like
to joke that you know you think you have
it bad here at MIT in the old days
before you could do your problem set it
two o'clock in the morning you had to
build your own batteries to be able to
do it all right
so anode electrons are produced from
oxidation at the anode so the electrons
produced here flow out of the cell and
in this particular type of
electrochemical cell zinc solid is
oxidized to zinc plus two so if we look
at this over here this is my little
beautiful depiction of the blow-up of
the elect of the electrode we have our
zinc solid here and we have zinc plus
two an aqueous solution so when the
electrons leave the zinc solid so that
the zinc then leaves the electrode and
goes into solution forming zinc plus two
those electrons go out so the electrons
will then go into the cathode and notice
I had a typo in the handout I find this
cut pretty funny I don't know if it's me
or spellcheck right now I wrote
elections are consumed oh man it's been
a long week between the national
elections and our t-shirt elections
anyway I didn't mean elections
I met electrons yes of course
electrons are consumed by a reduction
reaction
of course I'd noticed that after I had
printed hundreds of copies okay and this
particular reaction here copper plus two
is reduced to copper solid and if we
look over here we have copper plus two
in aqueous solution when electrons two
electrons come in those two electrons go
to the copper plus two and reduce it to
copper solid and the copper solid
actually plates on the electrode so we
can measure the flow we can have a meter
that measures the bolts or the flow of
electrons the electron current and also
what's that salt bridge doing well the
salt bridge can help maintain the
neutrality in the system because over
here we're generating plus charge and
over here we're losing prowess charge
and so ions can flow through the salt
bridge and keep the charges more similar
in our two different beakers all right
so I know my pictures are gorgeous but I
have a little animation to show you that
will also show you what I was talking
about oxidation at the electrode so zinc
zinc solid is going to lose electrons
and form zinc plus two and let me just
show you that happening so there are the
electrons going away and here is ink
popping off as zinc plus two and then if
the zinc plus two is going to be in
solution so there are the electrons go
again and the zinc solid pops off as
zinc plus two all right so now let's
consider reduction at the cathode so
here we have our copper solid here we
have a copper plus two and here the
electrons are going to come in and join
up with our copper plus two and it's
going to plate on to the electrode there
come the electrons there they come again
and now we have added solid copper to
our electrode and just one more time and
I think it's so cool that we can just
watch those
electrons move like that okay all right
so there's our electrochemical cell
where we have an oxidation and a
reduction reaction instead of drawing
this emitted Li beautiful picture every
time we can have a shorthand
representation for this so we can say
zinc solid and then we have a little
line here that little line indicates we
have a phase boundary so that means
we're going from solid to a different
phase and in this case we're going to
aqueous so solid zinc to zinc plus two
the two lines here indicate the salt
bridge so this tells us that the
reaction on this side is in one beaker
and the reaction on this side is in our
other beaker the reaction in the other
side is copper plus two aqueous a single
line for phase boundary going to copper
solid now if we had say two aqueous of
species we wouldn't have a phase
boundary we just have a comma but if you
have a phase boundary you get the line
all right so let's
it's a clicker competition let's
consider another cell it still has ink
but now it has tin why don't you tell me
which reaction is that the anode and
which reaction is at the cathode and
also which of those as oxidations in
which is reductions
all right we'll just do ten more seconds
right okay so some of these had parts of
it right but there was a mistake we have
an ox so that is wrong so you have to
pay attention to whether these match and
then also that the reaction is written
consistent with the word so only number
two had all the various different parts
right okay so we can come back here and
you can enter so the reaction at the
anode was the zinc reaction and that is
an oxidation and ox the reaction at the
cathode is the tin reaction ten plus
four two electrons ten plus two aqueous
and that's a reduction and while you
have your clickers out why don't you
tell me how you would represent that
electrochemical cell
alright let's just do 10 more seconds
so right so I mentioned this very
briefly this was my tricky clicker
question because it's a competition so
there's no phase transition here so you
have a comma and the top one a few
people put down but it's not it's not
solid here so that one is is not correct
okay so here you can write down in your
notes you have the zinc phase transition
zinc plus two aqueous and then we have
our salt bridge zinc plus four aqueous
comma or sink ten plus four comma 10
plus two and now we're ready for winners
see if Sam's also ready to present the
winners
all right we need a strategy to defeat
Dan's recitation but we know what
t-shirt we're playing for now alright
have a great weekend everybody
alright let's just take 10 more seconds
all right if someone want to tell me how
they got the right answer you know that
your and your oxygen - to try to people
it's not a peroxide and you know you're
sum is going to be neutral so you have
one yep that's right so this one
chlorine is usually minus one the
exception is when it's with oxygen and
so oxygen is always minus two and let's
it's in a peroxide or superoxide and
hydrogen's always plus one except when
it's with a metal like sodium something
Group one or group two okay so today
take out lecture twenty five notes we're
just gonna wrap those notes up that
shouldn't take too long
and then keep going with lecture twenty
six so we're talking about this cell and
we're going to talk about this
electrochemical cell a lot so we had a
sink on one side zinc at the anode and
the zinc was being oxidized generating
electrons which come around to the
copper and then the copper plus two ions
were being reduced to copper solid so
the zinc anode was being consumed and
the copper cathode had copper solid
being plated onto it so Faraday's law
says that the amount at which an anode
like the zinc anode is consumed and the
amount of copper that gets plated on at
the cathode is proportional to the
charge that passes through the system so
according to Faraday's law there's a
proportionality between the consumption
and also depositing of metal and the
amount of charge going through the
system so we can think about how much as
ink is consumed and how much copper is
deposited on its and on its cathode or
its electrode if the current if you have
a current of 1 amp flowing for one hour
so let's just take a look at how we do a
problem like this first step is we want
to think about calculate the charge
that's going through the system and so Q
here we have another Q naught the
reaction quotient but the magnitude of
the charge and that's in coulombs and
that's going to be equal to the current
times the time so we have the current I
and the current is in amps and T is in
seconds and conveniently amps equal
coulombs per second so this equation
works out our units will work out so Q
is going to be equal to we have one
point zero amps and it was one hour so
that's 3600 seconds or 3600 coulombs
because we have an amp times second and
then here we have this number of
coulombs and now we want to convert to
the number of moles of electrons that
that is equivalent to that that charge
in coulombs is equivalent to and here
our Faraday's constant is our conversion
factor so Faraday's constant we have 96
thousand four hundred and eighty-five
coulombs per mole is one faraday and
it's this kind of funny-looking F over
here so we have our coulombs so we can
use now the Faraday's constant to
convert and we get point zero three
seven three moles of electrons so that's
the number of moles of electrons that
would be going through our system that
correspond to that amount of charge
alright so now we need to relate this
back to the zinc and the copper so step
three we want to know first the number
of moles of the zinc and copper involved
and then convert that to grams because
the problem asked us for grams so we
have the number of moles of electrons
that are going through the system and so
for every one mole of zinc consumed how
many electrons go into the system what's
the ratio one two how many electrons
the one zinc solid going to one zinc
plus two so that's going to be two moles
of electrons and then we need to look up
how are we going to convert our moles to
grams what are we looking up yeah
molar mass molecular weight atomic mass
so we in our periodic table grams per
mole and so we get one point two grams
here
for this equation alright so for copper
so we have the same number of moles of
electrons that are going through the
system so for every one mole of copper
solid deposited on its electrode how
many moles of electrons have to come
into the system louder - yes so that's
two as well and then we look up again in
the periodic table the atomic weight
molecular weight and it's almost the
same copper and zinc so - the number of
significant figures it's the same amount
of grams now this will not always be the
case they're just very close to each
other in in their molecular or atomic
weight okay so we have two significant
figures also our current and time only
had two significant figures so we only
have two significant figures in this
problem alright so in this particular
electrochemical cell again we had our
anode was being consumed and the
electrons that were generated ended up
plating the copper on sometimes you're
not going to want to do that sometimes
you're just going to want to actually
play something with copper for example
and so let's look at some of the uses
for this kind of chemistry so here's
some electroplating this steel spoon
will have a thin coating of copper
deposited on it the cell consists of an
anode of pure
a solution of copper sulfate and as a
cathode a spoon there is no net reaction
but copper metal is transferred from the
anode to the cathode it's pretty nice
okay so this kind of electroplating is
pretty common where you use these kind
of reactions to get your copper which is
in that solution to to plate as copper
solid on to something so it could be a
spoon it could be electrode yeah why is
it dangerous I you know I've seen these
demos before so I'm not I'm not I think
that they that's just like security
regions to say to say that I don't think
it's like incredibly dangerous frankly
but I probably shouldn't say that I'll
get myself into all sorts of trouble
don't try this at home I don't know why
all right yeah but not like not that
much worse than a lab stuff yeah Elena
makes jewelry so she knows all about
this but she isn't she doesn't she does
it very safely very safely okay all
right so let's look at a couple other
kinds of electrodes it is not always the
case that electrode is consumed or that
an electrode gets tough deposited on it
some electrodes are inert an example for
this is a platinum electrode it is inert
so it doesn't get consumed and it
doesn't get reacted on to during the
reaction and so here's an example of a
cell that uses this so over here now we
have still our copper system so this is
our cathode again over here and a
cathode does what oxidation or reduction
as a reduction and so this is our same
reaction
copper plus two two electrodes co2
copper solid so this is doing the
plating again but on this time it's
different before we have the zinc
electrode that was being consumed but
now we have this platinum and the
reaction that happens at the anode it's
still an oxidation always an oxidation
at the anode but the oxidation reaction
is chromium plus two going to pluck
chromium
plus three in an electron so here the
electrode is inert and the reaction is
all happening in the same phase all
happening in solution so we can also
write the note the notation for this
kind of cell and so here we would have
platinum solid the single line which
means the phase difference chromium plus
two aqueous comma because now there's
not a phase transition between these
chromium plus three aqueous the two
lines that means what what do those mean
again salt bridge so this indicates
that's one beaker this is the other
beaker and here we have the copper plus
two aqueous single line four phase
change and a copper solid so again our
anode reaction in our cathode reaction
alright so this is another kind you can
also use platinum electrodes in
combination with what's known as a
hydrogen electrode so these are often
together the Platinum with the hydrogen
and many reduction potentials and when
you get problem set eight you're going
to be looking up in your book a lot of
standard reduction potentials and money
then we'll say measured against SH E and
a lot of people say like who is this she
that measures all of these potentials in
the back of books and that she is the
standard hydrogen electrode alright so
let's think about how this electrode is
being used so we when it's used as a
cathode we have h plus aqueous phase
transition to h2 gas and then another
phase transition to our solid platinum
inert electrode and here when it's used
as a cathode H+ is being reduced but it
can also be used as an anode and this is
a clicker question why don't you tell me
what would be happening when the
hydrogen platinum electrode is being
used as an anode or reactions being used
as an antidote
ten seconds
see if you get 90% 89 89 % Oh far away
okay that is the right answer though
okay so some of these the Platinum is
inert so it's not doing anything and
it's over here so it's not doing
anything so we can rule out all the
things that platinum are doing stuff all
right H+ being oxidized so you ever
heard of h2 plus no so we don't want
that we know at the anode it should be
oxidized so we can eliminate all the
ones that are reduced okay so we only
have really kind of one good option if
you say that the Platinum is inert so h2
then gets oxidized in this case forming
H+ all right so let's let's look at us
let's look at a cell like this that uses
the hydrogen electrode so here's an
example now on this side we have our
regular zinc system for our anode and so
over here we're using as the cathode the
hydrogen electrode and so here in this
beautiful drawing that I made we have a
glass tube here where you're pumping h2
gas in at one atmosphere in the middle
of the tube we have our nert platinum
electrode and then these are h2 gas
bubbles down here and we have strong
acid HCL which is our source of h plus
in solution so over here again this is
our cathode so we have a reduction at
the cathode and we have h plus aqueous
phase transition h2 and gas and then
another phase transition to our solid
platinum electrode and over here is our
standard anode our oxidation that
involves zinc and zinc plus 2 so we
could also have had the hydrogen
electrode over here as well all right so
that gives you a number of different
examples of types of
electrodes that you can have and types
of cells that you can have and and that
is the end of this today's two-hour
lecture 25 notes and soon as you finish
writing that down we'll go and look at
lecture 26 again we're continuing on the
same theme and now we're going to talk
about the potential of these cells so
we've talked about the reactions
happening at anodes and cathodes how to
write them and now we're going to think
about the change in potential that
occurs when you run these reactions